we didn't well we didn't really start
out to to sort of use maths to clean up
our oceans but I think having now done
the project that's sort of where it led
so the idea is our oceans are pretty
polluted it's a very famous photo I
think it's taken last year so this whale
has eaten sixty four pounds of plastic
which I think caused it to to dari and
it may not possibly sound that much I
mean maybe it does but if you convert 64
pounds of plastic for a hundred thousand
pound whale that's equivalent to one of
us eating six Tesco carrier bags so it's
quite a ridiculous amount of plastic and
it turns out that 80 percent of
pollution in the marine environment
comes from the land most of this is
through fertilizers washing through the
soil sort of runoff from from oil and
different things sort of it all kind of
comes from the land enters the river
system and then hits the ocean so in
terms of cleaning up our oceans you
actually want to first of all focus on
the source of all that pollution which
is the land in which is rivers and so
what I looked at in my PhD was trying to
understand the question which was where
does river water go when it enters the
ocean so it's sort of the big picture
question it's so we have the water cycle
right so you have water rains from
clouds it's on the ground it goes into
the rivers and then the river flows into
the ocean and then the water is
evaporated back up into the clouds
that's sort of the standard water cycle
which of course is correct but I wanted
to focus more on well when it's in the
river and then the river water flows
flows through the river hits the river
mouth and then goes into the ocean and
then it's that question where does it
actually then go because if the river is
containing all of the pollution if we
can model and understand and predict
where that river water actually goes
within our oceans
you then know the area is most
susceptible to pollution and you know
the areas where you can concentrate your
cleanup operations Drive fix the problem
that was sort of the the motivation
behind it and now it's going to get
super messy because I did a massive PhD
so that
the setup and we want to model this this
situation and I've got a couple of
images here of the North Sea so that's
the same region shown so obviously this
is the UK on the left here and in the
black here let's start with this one so
here you have about here you've got the
River Rhine flowing out into the North
Sea and this is a measure of density and
basically where it's red is fresh water
so if you look at this your rivers
coming out here and it is not simply
spreading out in all directions it is
very clearly turning to the side and
then flowing along the coast and it's
being confined along that coast based on
that that image and you see a similar
thing here so this is sea surface
temperature so the river water is colder
and again you can see sort of the River
Rhine is about here and it's coming out
and it's concentrated very much along
the coast as well with those lighter
green shades so this is sort of roughly
giving you a feel for what's going on
your river is flowing into the ocean and
it turns out that the rotation of the
earth is sort of the leading thing and
controlling where that water goes so
let's look at this a bit more closely
I've given already giving away my one of
my key points so anyway so this is a
little schematic of a river so here's
your River flowing in we know that it
turns and flows along the coast so in
the northern hemisphere it goes to the
right in the southern hemisphere to the
left due to the switch and the Coriolis
force and so you can sort of ask
yourself the question well what else
might affect where this river water goes
so I've got a list of things here so
I've mentioned the Earth's rotation
discharge rate so of course if there's
been a lot of rain there's going to be
more water leaving your River so you
might expect that to influence where
that water actually goes and how that
river water behaves in the ocean the
actual density difference so the ocean
is roughly constant salinity but you can
have different changes in salinity
within your River that's going to change
the sort of the density the difference
between the river water in the ocean and
then there are other things you've got
wind and waves of course are going to
affect where this water goes tides
bathymetry which basically means the
shape of the riverbed and then you can
also think of like sort of almost like
human impacts are like industry you know
have we like built a big sort of dock or
Harbor along the coast is that going to
influence things so you can get super
you can make this problem really really
complicated because it is really
complicated there's so many different
things that are going to affect where
this river water actually ends up but
the approach that we use in in maths is
basically to say well I can't model
everything so I as a scientist have to
say well these are what I think are the
most important things and let's just
focus on them and try to understand them
because if I understand the most
important things then at least we've got
some kind of foothold on the problem so
sort of rather than not having a clue
it's like well we've got a little bit of
a clue we've got later starting point
and the way we did it was to focus on
these three so we're gonna look at the
rotation rate the discharge rate so the
flux of water leaving and the density
difference so how salty versus how fresh
you're to report an ocean water and I
did this using experiment here's my my
fish tank and it literally as a fish
tanks about a meter cubed which is in
the live in Cambridge and this whole
thing is mounted on a turntable which
rotates and what basically is happening
so here's a schematic showing the same
thing you've got fresh water here in
this reservoir flows down a pipe enters
through what I've label here is the
source this you can think of as your
river this is your river channel this
feeds in fresh water to the saltwater
tank so you've got your tank filled with
saltwater freshwater shoots in and
that's going to hopefully behave like a
river that's the plan and I've labeled
here the three key parameters because
these are gonna come up again in the
formula so they're also color coded to
help everyone so we've got green F is
rotation rate so I'm going to perform
lots of different experiments where I
spin my tank at different speeds to see
what effect that has I'm then going to
do again lots of different experiments
varying Q which is the volume flux so
how much fresh water is leaving my River
and then I'm gonna vary how salty and
how well my fresh water I'm going to
keep purely as fresh and I'm going to
change the salinity of my salt water so
that results in a change in the density
difference and that's going to be G
prime which is in yellow and it's dr.
brother so
here is gonna be a video an experiment
so the river comes in here because of
the rotation it turns to the side and
then it begins to flow around the edge
of the tank so this is matching what we
could see on those satellite images the
river water is entering because of the
rotation because the Coriolis force it
turns to the side and then it's flowing
along the coast the coast here being the
edge of my tank let this progress a
little bit so the color represents depth
so I've dyed the water here with red
food coloring and then you can sort of
do a a calibration to figure out the
amount of light that's got shines
through and convert that into depth
don't need to go to the details but
basically red is shallow then it goes
through to yellow then green and then
blue bits are the deepest so but you can
sort of see what's happening here is
it's shallower at the edge it gets
deeper there's a large sort of I call it
the outflow vortex like a big whirlpool
at the river mouth and then you get this
current flowing along the coast so what
I decided to focus on as well let's
understand the current more first of all
which is a little bit easier
mathematically but that's sort of that's
what's going to carry the pollution
along the coast so we want to understand
that current and some properties of it
and you can also take this data and show
it in 3d which I've got on this one here
so this is the same thing but just you
can now sort of see the depth it's quite
spiky but you can see the current here
propagating and then over time it gets a
little bit deeper and then the prettiest
one so what we've done here is fill the
water with glass beads and as shine
light through them and then you take a
time lapse picture so the water's coming
out from the bottom it's turning here to
form this spiral and then flowing along
the coast so you get a really nice feel
here for here for what sort of going on
with the velocity and the patterns
within that River outflow so how on
earth you model this you start with what
I call the navier-stokes equations they
model the flow of every fluid in the
world you actually get a million dollars
because we're understanding these
properly it's a real prize because we
don't really understand them very well
so the point is we have these equations
that model this but we don't really know
what's going on with them so we make
lots and lots of assumptions
similar to what I said at the start it's
too complicated we've got to simplify
things so I make all these assumptions
it doesn't really matter what they are
and what I end up with is this really
nice formula for the current depth so I
am gonna say my maximum current depth
occurs along the wall and I'm gonna call
it H naught so if we go back to this so
I'm saying that the current is deepest
next to the wall and then it gets
shallower as I move away from the coast
hopefully makes sense you can kind of
see it here you can see it in that one
as well so that's what I'm going to do
and then I get this nice formula and I'm
going to put back in our color codes
because here I have a measurement of how
deep my river current is in terms of my
rotation rate F by volume flux Q and my
density difference G and that's it
that's just a simple plug those numbers
in go to a river measure those things
plug those numbers in and this tells you
how deep your river current is it's
really nice let's do the same thing
let's get a measurement for the width so
how wide is my current how far away from
the coast does my river current extend
again it's just given in terms of those
three important parameters the G prime
the Q and the F and then finally you get
the velocity it's got a weird number at
the front but otherwise it's just in
terms of those three same parameters so
what can we do with this data well here
are some experimental results so this is
the depth over time so I've measured the
depth at one point next to the wall here
so obviously it's basically at zero at
the start there's a bit of fluctuation
because it's it's experiments there are
lots of errors and experiments so
there's a bit of fluctuation then the
current hits so it starts to increase in
depth increasing depth and it kind of
flattens off so it's sort of asymptotic
katatak ly tending towards this final
depth and the blue line this final depth
comes straight from that really nice
simple formula so my experiment is
matching what my theory is saying should
happen and then I can do the same thing
with the width the matching here so here
starting at the bottom you move across
the current so the current next to the
wall is here so it's deepest at the wall
here so you can see four centimeters
matches the four up here and then sort
of it's not the clearest
plot but you can kind of it's not too
far away from matching and then you can
also merge the velocity if you look at
the first few things here so the current
front is given here and then a few
seconds later three seconds later it's
here
three seconds later it's here three
seconds later it's here so this is sort
of following the current along there and
then if you compare it to real data so
based on the numbers for the River Rhine
that again the satellite image at the
beginning the theory predicts a depth
between five to ten meters and you can
measure how deep the river current
coming out of the River Rhine is it's
about ten meters it's pretty nice the
width predicted between ten and twenty
meters away from the coast you can
measure that it's about twenty
kilometers as well
sorry not meters kilometers and then the
speed again predicted about not 0.25 0.5
and it's measured about 0.5 so those
very simple formulas formula are
actually giving us useful information
you just go to a river you measure three
things and suddenly now you know where
your river current goes you know how
deep it is you know how far away from
the coast it is and you know how fast it
moves so let's imagine you want to clean
up for example really practical use of
this where they should have used my my
work was in Tokyo so they're currently
clean up Tokyo Bay for the Olympics and
their current approach which is fine is
drag a huge nano net to capture all the
plastic in the ocean and the pollution
behind a boat and they are just a zigzag
in their way across the entire of Tokyo
Bay but we're sort of you know being a
bit smarter about it you could basically
use some kind of modelling like this to
look at where is the pollution going to
actually be concentrated in Tokyo Bay
and you know you could put the numbers
into my model and it would say well it's
only going to be in the top 10 meters
for example so you only need a net that
drops down 10 meters because the
pollution will not go below that because
it's trapped in the river water not the
ocean water and you wouldn't need to go
beyond again in this situation you will
need to go beyond 20 kilometres away
from the coast you could just focus on
that that sort of near coast area so
that's sort of practical uses we haven't
had much luck getting any
to actually use it in that practical
sense but as I said there was what we
started with it was more like this is an
interesting math problem and then also
we sort of got this information and it
seemed like it could be really useful in
terms of being used for helping us clean
operations and I think that brings it
into my talk
oops not that one that one um so I do
also have a website and them on social
media
Tom rocks maths and I have I've written
six articles where I explained this in
really simple terms I wrote them with my
mum and dad in mind who are bless them
not her they think there's university
sure I believe that way so so yes if you
want to find a bit more some more
information there and I'm happy to take
any questions
[Applause]